so rather than muting it i
i just did the call-in okay yeah
yeah so this is basically due to the
tunneling effect which is basically a
quantum mechanical effect that happens
for the flow of current through the
oxide okay
and again there is one more type of
leakage current that flows
that is primarily due to the pn junction
diodes
because we know that a reverse biased pn
junction will also have some sort of
reverse saturation current okay so due
to that mechanism there will be a
kind of current flow between the source
and the body or between the drain and
the body
okay so these are some of the leakage
current and uh
today we'll focus more on the sub
threshold conduction okay
and there are some set of problems that
could come around this particular
threshold connection we will do some set
of problems as well okay
yeah now
let me begin with this topic
so as i said a subthreshold connection
is a kind of current flow that happens
between the source and the drain even
for the value of vgs
that is less than vt okay so we call
that non-zero current as the sub
threshold conduction okay
so now we'll just look into like why
this is happening or how how exactly we
can
model this particular current okay so
now what we do is that uh
normally when we try to plot a graph of
ids versus vgs
what we assume is that the current is
almost zero till i reach the value of
vgs that is equal to vt
and after then you assume that there is
a kind of quadratic nature
and uh after a while the device will
enter into linear
so there will be some sort of straight
line after this okay yeah so we will not
worry much about this
cara which is above the value of vt okay
now in this case we would see that the
curve that i have drawn here is almost
flat okay so
but rather if i try to change the scale
of this particular axis
that is my y-axis in terms of
logarithmic okay
with a base of 10 and when i try to
replot this
graph we would see something different
okay
okay so we would see some sort of
characteristics and this characteristics
happens
the moment the value of regis is less
than vt okay so
now when i have this kind of cara which
has been plotted
against this logarithmic scale of this
uh ideas
okay so so logarithmic scale uh would
then be
in terms of 10 to the power i'm just
choosing some random number okay so that
the step size would be in terms of uh
something in this particular scale okay
so so every equal increment will be
in terms of decay clear so when i see
this particular
you could see that there is a linear
relation that exists between this
logarithmic scale of ideas
and the value of vgs that is less than
the value of vd okay
so now the way to model this particular
picture
is we can use some sort of concept that
we have studied in
vjt okay so first let me try to explain
why this current flows and through what
type of mechanism this current flows
okay
and later we'll just try to model this
part of the current that actually flows
for the value of v so that is less than
v t clear
and again i'm just taking this n mass
transistor
so clearly we could see that there is an
n which is basically the source terminal
okay and then there is a kind of
p type semiconductor okay which is
basically the body
so there is an en pen transistor
right so it is it could be visualized
something like this
with some sort of a parasitic bjt
transfer that is being formed just
because of this pn junction
diodes across the source in the body and
across the drain and the
body okay so due to which there happens
to be some sort of reverse bias and we
know that each of these pn junctions are
basically reversed by us
and it is through this
the current flows okay and whatever
current is that
it's it's basically a reverse saturation
current
okay now let us try to model this
particular current okay so i'm not going
to explain how exactly these currents
have been written down but i'll just
give the final expression okay
so the current that is flowing for the
value of vgs
that is less than vt could be modeled
with some sort of
expression okay so now the way that this
particular plot
shows a kind of linear characteristics
between the logarithmic scale of ideas
versus a linear scale of vgs one could
see that there is a kind of relation
okay so
now can anyone tell me like what type of
relation that these
the ideas and vgs
defines in this particular zone where uh
we are trying to plot against the
logarithmic scale of
10. linear no it cannot be linear right
because
yeah it's actually linear so which means
that i have something like logarithmic
scale
and this is my y-axis so y equals to mx
so that can be some sort of slope value
exponential
yeah yeah that is what i wanted okay so
now that in order to remove this
logarithmic scale i have to take
anti-log
which is nothing but the exponential on
both the sides when i do this then what
happens is that
you would end up having some something
like exponential term okay
so so this is what we would end up so
even our
case the current equation that i am
about to write will also have this kind
of exponential
relation with respect to the value of v
g s okay so
there is a reverse saturation current
which i am writing it as just
is okay sometimes it can also be written
as
ids naught okay so we will not worry
about
what notation to be used okay in general
there is some sort of reverse saturation
current
and that current has to be multiplied
with some sort of excuse me sir
yeah uh the log is taken based in
november
so how can it be exponential uh
e supposed to be longer yes if it's long
it'll be exponential that
even so it's supposed to be long right
okay then i think it's fine yeah
yeah it's supposed to be some sort of
logarithmic scale and they actually gets
related with
an exponential term okay and again uh
this is
a concept basically through this bjt
structure that we are trying to derive
okay
yeah so here we have some sort of term
through which we could be able to relate
the value of vgs okay and also there is
also one more term that
happens over because of the pn junction
that happens because of the drain
to source or basically because of the
drain and source
we also have some sort of current flow
because we need some sort of
potential difference between the drain
and the source in order to make the
current to flow right so we need some
sort of
component that is relating to our vds
okay so again this is
uh there is no proof that i can give for
this
it's just the equation that i'm just
writing it down and
right now if at all if the value of this
vds okay
if the value of this vds is much much
greater than the thermal voltage
which is nothing but kt by q okay maybe
i could write it as
vk okay so that uh we will use this vt
for
uh representing the threshold voltage
and vk for representing the thermal
voltage okay
so if this expression is satisfied then
obviously what happens is that the e to
the power
most negative term would end up having a
value of 0 okay
so in that case one could approximate
this current flow of ids to be
equal to is into e to the power of v g s
minus v t divided by n times that of v k
okay so i've just reduced this
expression of kt by q
as just vk and then i have substituted
that notation over here
okay yeah so this is the current flow
and now
one could also wanted something out of
this
device right so when i try to plot this
particular camera we will try to
evaluate the slope factor
okay so i want to evaluate the slope
factor
with something known as s and i will try
to define this flow factor
we want to switch to to the very lowest
current
at the earliest okay so i want the slope
to be much steeper
okay i want to decrease at a much faster
rate okay
so this is what we want to evaluate
through this flow factor the rate at
which i am trying to switch off
supposed to be much faster okay so that
can be read by the slope factor
uh excuse me sir can you repeat it i
couldn't follow what you
explained yeah yeah so i'm talking about
the slope factor so
this flow factor is an important
quantity in order to know
whether our device can quickly turn off
to a very
small amount of current the moment i
switch the value of vgs
below the value of vt i want this
current
to go to a very low values so we we
basically
want to measure the slope factor of this
in order to measure how fast the
current is getting reduced
for the value of vgs that is below the
value of vt okay so
that is the measure that we are doing in
terms of slope factor
okay so let me try to define uh more
formally rather than
speaking it out so i'm just going to
define
a factor which is known as slope factor
yes which basically measures
the inverse rate okay
of decline of ideas
with respect to vgs
below the value of vt okay so
it actually measures the quality of the
technology or of the mosfet that we are
using
okay so now the way that we are going to
measure this particular slope factor
is by reading out the slope value of
this okay so now what i am going to do
is that i am just going to take
two different currents okay and then the
corresponding
vgs values okay say for example i'm just
picking one of the current at which
my ids 1 is equal to 10 to the power
minus 7 okay
and the corresponding value of vgs let
me take it as v
one okay and let me take the second one
which is the
ids two where the current id2 supposed
to be a decade away from this
value of ids one clear so clearly there
is a difference of ten
between both these currents and i choose
that corresponding value of vgs as vgs2
here so you got the differences right so
now that i just want to measure the
slope factor
i make use of this equation that i have
written down earlier
that i have ids 1 which is basically
equal to 10 to the power minus 7
okay amperes and that is
related to the value of vgs as vgs 1
minus vt divided by n times that of kv
now i have one more current which i have
taken
which is a decade away from this ids one
okay the idea is two
the difference between the ids one and
ids two supposed to be
ten okay and that can be
returned in terms of the same expression
but in the place of regis i am just
speaking as vgs2
okay the corresponding value of vgs2 so
now what i
can do is that i divide both these
equations
okay one divided by two then
i would end up having something like
this
i will take long on both the sides okay
so that
so this delta v g s is what i'm going to
define as the
slope factor which can be written as i'm
just going to expand this
which is kt by q in the place of vk
and then into lon of 10 and the unit for
this
would be like
millivolt per decade
so hope that you're clear with the slow
factor here so the slow factor is
something that we are trying to measure
for the current that flows
below the value of v g s that is less
than the value of v t
okay and how are we measuring is that we
are taking two currents that are a
decade of
difference between them clear so i've
just chosen here 10 to the power minus 7
as one of the current and
the other current that i'm taking is 10
to the power minus 8
okay so i've taken that difference and
the corresponding regions values i have
taken
and then when i try to measure their
differences supposed to be equal to this
okay so now clearly for room temperature
okay that is for a
temperature of 300 kelvin okay
one could write this vk or this kt by q
would be approximately equal to
sometimes 25 millivolt
or sometimes they used to write 26
millivolt okay so
what we do is that we'll just fix this
26 millivolt as our quantity here
okay and in case if the value of n
is equal to 1 then i just want you to
compute what is the slope factor of that
okay so this is just a kind of ideal
case where
having an n that is equal to 1 is pretty
pretty much rare okay so i just want you
to compute and get me the value of this
slope factor for
n that is equal to one so that you can
just directly substitute here
and you have to have your calculator in
order to compute the remaining part
okay so the value would be closer to 60
millivolt per decade
okay yeah so exactly if you want it is
like 59.86 but we would approximate that
to be closer to
60 millivolt per decade now what does
this tells us
okay this is the most important thing
now
this tells me that in order to reduce
the current from 10 to the power minus 7
to 10 to the power minus 8 i need only
60 millivolt
difference between the vgs okay so this
is actually
a better quantity but let us take
en that is equal to 1.5 which is
normally found
in the mos technologies okay so when i
have
the n that is equal to 1.5 the slope
factor becomes
something like 90 millivolt per decade
now what does this mean
which number is good
having s that is equal to 60 millivolt
is good or having yes that is equal to
90 millivolt
per decade is good so which one among
you
okay you see in order to reduce from
uh 10 to the power minus 7 to 10 to the
power minus 8 i have to have
the difference the v gs1 has to change
to v gs2 so that the vgs 2 can be
returned as vgs 1
plus 90 millivolt so i need a 90
millivolt to reduce this current
whereas here when i have n that is equal
to one
okay so let's say for example i have
regis one here and
i could write this vgs two as we just
one plus just sixty millivolt so which
one is good in this case
which is stepping down much faster
n equal to 1 yeah n equals to 1 because
i need only 60 millivolt to reduce the
current from 10 to the power minus 7 to
10 to the power
minus 8 okay so this is actually better
option than compared to this one
okay so maybe the way that i have marked
here as a slope factor
might confuse you though the only thing
that i wanted here is that
through the slope factor we are trying
to evaluate
this quantity okay so
how much of the vgs that i needed you
know reduce the current a decade below
okay
so the rate at which i want to reduce is
what we are trying to compute through
this
slope factor s okay or the differences
in the value of vgs okay
if i could able to make this vgs1 and
vgs2 as close as possible
then the rate at which this would
decline would be much faster okay so for
this
new graph that i've drawn you could see
that i need only a small amount of v
just to reduce from 10 to the power
minus 7 to 10 to the minus 8
okay so in that case the s factor will
be
much smaller okay so i need
s to be small or basically the delta
which is to be small
in order to reduce the current by a
decade
okay hope that it makes sense so we want
this delta which is to be as small as
possible
okay so in this case having an n factor
that is equal to 1 will give us the
minimum v just to reduce the current
by a decade okay yeah
so now let us do a simple problem here
yeah hope that you could be able to see
this particular problem so what is the
minimum
threshold voltage for which the leakage
current
through the off transistor that is when
vgs is equal to zero is ten to the power
for three times lesser than the transfer
that is barely on
when we just is equal to bt okay so
uh assume that the value of n is equal
to 1.5 okay so we would be solving two
things
okay one with n that is equal to 1.5 the
other one with n that is equal to 1.3
okay
so soi stands for silicon on insulator
which is again a kind of technology
through which mos transits can be
fabricated
okay so we will talk about these things
later on when we discuss about this unit
number five okay so as of now we'll just
won't worry about this
sy or any other factor okay we'll worry
about only the factor of
n so now given this question how would
we
actually start so we actually wanted you
to calculate the threshold voltage of
the device
based on the given data we know that
the current there is some sort of
current okay
at these two points one when the value
of vgs is at vt
there is some current which is ids one
let us take and there is also one more
current
okay which is ids2 when vgs
is equal to zero okay so and the
difference between these two
are 10 to the power 3 okay
that is ids 1 is 10 to the power
3 times greater than the value of ids 2
okay that is what has been given here
now we want you to compute the value of
vt
based on this expression so how i can
rewrite those
currents when the value of vgs is equal
or less than the value of vt
how i can replace this ids1 and ids2
expressions and we also have to assume
that the value of vds is
much larger than the thermal voltage
okay so this is an assumption so
we can leave out the exponential part
that was there in the original
expression okay
so we can use i s into e to the power of
something
yes yes yes yeah this is what we wanted
actually
so in this case we know that in general
i can bring out the expression of ids
okay so which is defined as is e to the
power vgs
minus vt divided by n times that of
vk okay so i can use this equation and i
can write it as is
e to the power and the value of vgs that
i have
when i am at vt will become zero right
so vg is yeah so what happens to the
exponential of
zero one it will be one okay
yeah so it is something like i s into
one
okay and on the other hand i have again
i is
e to the power and what is the value of
v j's that i have here
that is equal to zero right yeah so i
have something like minus vt divided by
n times that of vk okay
so i could cancel out this these two
terms and
i could bring the exponential on the
other side
vk and i have this 10 to the power 3
and take long on both the sides
so that we can get rid of this
so through this formula i could find the
value of the threshold voltage of the
transistor
okay so you can use this vk to be 26
approximately 26 millivolt okay at the
room temperature
and you just get me the value of this so
269 milli
ah yeah so approximately it comes around
yeah closer to this
269.4 approximately i can write it as
270 millivolt okay and that is the
threshold voltage of this particular
transfer
so now there is one more part of this
okay if at all if i'm using this
soi which has a smaller value of
n what is the threshold voltage that is
required for sy
if n is equal to 1.3 okay
so now this time what i do is that i
know that
i could rewrite this expression on the
other way
okay so which is nothing but vt can be
written as
n times vk and there is a lawn
to the 10 to the power 3 right so this 3
can be brought
in front and i can write it as lon of 10
itself
right so now this particular quantity
that i have here
is a well known factor which is nothing
but the s okay
and just by multiplying by a factor of
three would get me the
threshold voltage of the device okay so
now in case
if i know this s factor so
now for sy we know that
the n is said to be 1.3 okay so based on
this quantity
first let us try to calculate this slope
factor and then we
we know that this slow factor has to be
multiplied by a factor of 3
in order to get the value of the
threshold voltage of the transistor
right so i can use this way as well okay
so this is one more way
by which we can find the threshold
voltage okay
or you can use the same expression the
only thing is replace this n with a
factor of 1.3 that is also fine okay
so sometimes given an s factor
we can directly do this as well clear
so this is the slope factor that i have
and once i know this flow factor
what i can do is that i can just
multiply by a factor of three
to get put into okay
yeah so now what i'm going to do is that
i'm just going to
run in a much faster phase okay
so the second type of leakage that we
have
is about the gate leakage and as i said
this leakage happens just because the
thickness of the oxide for lower
technologies
has been dropped to a thickness which is
almost like 15
to 20 amp strong so which is like 10 to
the power minus 10
meters okay and due to which what
happens is that there is some
phenomena which is known as tunneling
that happens and that results
in this gate leakage current okay and
again this gate tunneling can be
classified
physically into two kind of physical
mechanisms
one is like fn tunneling okay which is
more important
when we have a moderate thickness
basically this kind of tunneling is
used for programming the ee probe okay
so apart from this we will not discuss
much about those gate leakage
things and there is also a direct
tunneling and this direct
internally happens even at low voltages
with
very thin oxide and this is the most
dominant leakage component that we have
for the lower technologies okay so the
direct handling is one of the dominant
factor
when you go for lower technologies
that's it we will not go much in depth
and the final
type of junction leakage that we have is
about the pn junction okay so here i
have a structure which is known as
n well structure we will talk about this
envelope
and there is something known as twin
turb and many such factors
when we discuss about unit number five
okay so as of now you assume that an
envelope
is something where we will have this
pmos transistor
and the piece of state is where we will
have these nmos
transistors clear
so as you could able to see that there
is a pn junction okay across the source
and the body and even in the case of
a pmos transfer there is some sort of pn
junction diodes okay
now we know that normally these p
injection diodes are in general reverse
bias
so in this case you could see that there
is a p substrate
so this p substrate is connected to the
ground through this p plus region okay
so it is something like we are trying to
fix some sort of
body potential which is generally a
ground for
an nmos transfer so similarly i would be
having
an envel this end well is completely
biased to a vdd okay so
to some power supply clear so there is
some sort of reverse bias
between this pn junction due to these
kind of body that has been connected to
a fixed potential okay
whereas the source and the drain may or
may not have the same potential as we
have for the body okay so they may have
a higher potential than compared to this
uh in the case of an n-type
semiconductor whereas in the case of a
p-type semiconductor
these p plus regions normally will take
voltages which are
either equal to v db or sometimes lower
than the value of v d d
here so right now you might not be able
to appreciate this particular phenomena
just because
we still have to go a long way okay so
the only thing is that
these pn junction diodes are in general
they are reverse biased
okay and whenever there is a reverse
biased pn junction we know that there is
some sort of leakage current and one
could model that
reverse bias leakage current through
this kind of expression okay
so here in this case so yeah
so why is there uh p plus and n plus in
p substrate so what is the user why will
this
because this is for the source and this
is for the drain
these n plus regions that are there in
our p substrate
is by construction uh we will have this
kind of structure
i'm talking about p plus and p minus
substitutes that
what does what are the negatives
this one you're talking this people okay
yeah yeah
so this is something like we are heavily
doped this
p type material just because in order to
reduce the resistivity
because even the resistance of the
material will also matters when we try
to apply some sort of potential
say for example if i have a very large
resistance
the voltage that i am applying here 5
volt will be dropped
very heavily when the resistance is
large okay so we want to reduce the
resistance so that
i could at least produce something like
4.9 volt
if the value of resistance is small okay
but in case if the resistance is large
okay then when i apply a five volt
then at this point i would get something
like five point sorry four point eight
or
four point seven volt something like
that okay so we want to reduce that
resistance when we try to apply
some sort of potentials here okay so due
to which we generally go for heavy doped
materials here
that's the reason why we have this p
plus regions here and
over here there is an n plus regions so
which is basically meant to
bias this body
body of both the pmos as with the nmos
does it make sense
sir i didn't understand properly so
because he said that
for for increasing the voltage we use
the p plus n cluster
so but how are the damage in this uh
formula
no no you see the entire body is
supposed to have some sort of potential
some sort of voltage okay so now i am
applying a voltage through this
particular
ground okay and that voltage has to be
supplied through this entire structure
okay but the opening that i'm giving
here
is it's something like how i can say
okay so every material that
that we use has some sort of resistance
okay
so say for example when i'm trying to
apply some 5 volt
even when you take a metal okay a
lengthy wire
which runs like kilometers away so this
230 volt that you apply
in one end when you reach to the other
end it will be like
220 volt okay so basically there's some
sort of resistances that is along the
path
okay and in order to reduce the
resistance we use this uh
aluminium wires the reason why we are
going for aluminum wire is that
the resistance of those wires are bit
less
okay so even here i'm trying to
apply this potential because it's a
planar structure like i have to talk
more about the semiconductor
over here but these things has to be
discussed during our unit number five
so planar fabrication is something like
all our terminals will be
at the top level so we will have a
general substrate or something
like a p substrate okay
and then what i do is that i i try to
dope things like a p
plus material with some sort of masking
and then
later there will be a metalization okay
i will have a wire and through the wire
i would be connected to
an external power supply like a five
volt uh supply okay
so what happens is that these voltages
are the current flows
through this shorter wire will have a
much larger resistance
and again when i'm entering into the
into the substrate
i need a low resistance path okay so
what we are trying to really
do here is that we want to reduce this
voltage that is getting dropped here
we want to observe whatever the voltage
that i have here
onto this entire surface as uniform as
possible
uh it is something like to reduce the
resistance
not much uh physics behind this
particular p plus region
okay dancer dancing yeah
sorry if i couldn't able to explain
properly
yeah so but these structures will not
actually create any sort of p-n junction
it's only the opposite structure like n
plus with p-type semiconductor will
create a p-n junction
and even here an n well which is nothing
but an n substrate for
a pmos uh will create a pn junction with
the p
plus sources and the drain structures
okay so those pn junctions are normally
reversed by us
and they generally conduct some small
current
across them okay even the annul that i
have drawn here
also creates some sort of bn junction
between the
p-type substrate and the zen well okay
so you have
almost like too many parasitic diodes
throughout the interior structure
okay and all of these structures work in
the reverse bias
conditions and due to which there will
be obviously current flow through them
okay and we call that as a junction
leakage current
yeah which is the current doesn't serve
for any purpose it just goes waste
okay and one could model the current
through this kind of equation where
the diode voltage vd can be returned as
minus vsb
between the source and the body or vdb
between the drain and the body
yeah so nothing much apart from these
discussions with respect to the leakage
current so today we discussed about
three type of leakages
one is the sub threshold conduction
the second one is the gate leakage
so the most dominant is the direct
tunneling impact okay so due to this
tunneling effect
the gate leakage current flows okay
between the gate and the body
and the third one is the junction
leakage so these are the three important
leakage current components that we have
okay
so the next couple of things as well
i'll just run
very fast okay so there's nothing much
to discuss the only thing that we are
going to discuss is that there are
certain parameters that varies with
respect to the temperature
okay so namely the mobility okay so the
mobility of the
carriers charge carriers generally
decreases with the rise in
temperature okay and the
due to this what happens is that the
saturation velocity also
tries to gets reduced with respect to
the temperature
now the reason why this mobility getting
reduced with respect temperature is that
the lattice
structure actually starts vibrating when
you raise the temperature of the
material okay and due to which the
carrier will be get heated by these
vibrated phonons
and due to which the mobility of these
those carriers will get reduced
okay so once it gets reduced saturation
velocity also gets reduced
and the other components like the
threshold
of the device also decreases linearly
with the rise in temperature
okay and here again the on current okay
also decreases with the rise in
temperature
and the sub threshold conduction which
is the current which we don't want to
exist rises exponentially with
temperature okay so
you see everything happens in the
opposite direction we want higher
mobility
just to make the switch on and off very
fast okay
and we want this threshold voltage of
the transfer to be
much higher so that we can set some sort
of switching voltages
okay that again gets reduced and we
don't want the substantial conduction
current to exist at all but
unfortunately when the temperature rises
it increases exponentially
and whereas the one good thing is that
the gate leakage
okay there is something which is
independent of the uh temperature
because of the tunneling effect
okay so so these are the side effects
that we have and there are some couple
of graph
not too many okay it shows the the
temperature
variation with respect to the current
okay so what happens the moment you
have the increase in temperature how
does the graph
shifts okay is what has been given okay
so clearly
the graph that has been plotted as id
versus vgs was plotted against the
square root of
ids okay so this is the case when we
have
saturation current okay so we know that
the saturation current
is actually returned as vgs minus vt the
whole square
okay so in order to show the linear
relation
we have taken a square root on both the
sides okay and that's the reason why
you would see the vgs was being plotted
against this
square root of ideas here and that shows
some sort of linear relation between the
temperature
vgs and the square root of ideas okay so
you could see that at high values of vgs
the current has a negative temperature
coefficient so
what does it mean is that the rise in
temperature actually reduces the current
okay at high values of vgs but for low
values of vgs in this particular region
we have a positive temperature
coefficient so when i say positive
temperature coefficient
this means that a rise in temperature
actually
raises the current okay so we will have
a high current when we have
a positive temperature coefficient when
the temperature rises okay
so that's it and with this let me stop
here okay